Blog post: "Debouncing in Queueing Systems" (#698)
inngest/website: pages/blog/_posts/debouncing-in-queuing-systems-optimizing-efficiency-in-async-workflows.mdx

---
focus: true
heading: "Debouncing in Queueing Systems: Optimizing Efficiency in Asynchronous Workflows"
subtitle: Explore backend message queuing systems, implementing debouncing in Postgres, and simplifying the process with Inngest.
showSubtitle: true
image: /assets/blog/debouncing-in-queuing-systems/featured-image.png
date: 2024-02-28
author: Dan Farrelly
---

When developers talk about debouncing, it's most often discussed as a front-end development technique to handle issues in user interfaces. It's also quite a useful technique to apply to backend message queuing systems. In this post we'll cover:

- what debouncing is,
- when to use debouncing with queues,
- how to implement this in a simple Posgtres queue,
- and how you can use this feature with Inngest.

## What is debouncing

> Debouncing is used to to avoid unnecessary re-executions. At its core, it is a technique used to control how often a particular task or operation is executed, ensuring that it only occurs once within a specified timeframe, even if it is triggered multiple times.

Reviewer: The wording may not be entirely correct for the technique.
```suggestion
Debouncing is used to avoid unnecessary executions. At its core, it is a technique to ensure a particular task or operation is executed only once after a specified delay since its last invocation, even if triggered multiple times within that delay.
```

## How to implement debouncing in a message queue

Depending on what backing queue you use, implementing debounce can be simple or difficult. At the basic level, your system needs to be able to schedule a given message at a timestamp in the future (the delay) and when the same message is sent, the currently scheduled message's timestamp is “pushed” back by the delay amount again. Your queue then must only pick up messages that are ready (the current timestamp).

Here we'll cover a basic implementation of a Postgres queue and look at how to add debounce. There are more advanced techniques for queuing in Postgres, but we will not cover that here. 

First, we'll create a simple `debounce_job_queue` table in our database. It will have a job `id` , a `job_type` , a current `status` for the job, a `payload` for relevant job data, and a `scheduled_at` timestamp. Lastly, we'll add a `debounce_key` which will be what we'll use to de-duplicate and delay work.

```sql

> CREATE TABLE debounce_job_queue (
>     id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
>     job_type VARCHAR(64),
> 		status VARCHAR(64),
>     payload JSONB,
>     scheduled_at TIMESTAMP,
> 		debounce_key VARCHAR(64)
> );

Reviewer: Nit: Run through a formatter
```suggestion
CREATE TABLE debounce_job_queue (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  job_type VARCHAR(64),
  status VARCHAR(64),
  payload JSONB,
  scheduled_at TIMESTAMP,
  debounce_key VARCHAR(64)
);
```

```

As we want to de-duplicate jobs waiting the queue, we'll add a unique index to ensure that there is only one matching job that is `'QUEUED'` at a given time.

```sql
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX debounce_key_status 
ON debounce_job_queue(debounce_key, status)
WHERE status = 'QUEUED';
```

Creating a new job in this queue is a relatively straightforward insert, but we add a few things that help us implement debounce:

> 1. Create a deterministic `debounce_key` using a hash of the job's type and payload JSON data. Alternatively, this could be any unique piece of data like a user id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a deterministic `debounce_key` using a hash of the job's type and payload JSON data. Alternatively, this could be any unique piece of data like a user's ID.
```

> 2. Allow the calling function to specify a delay when setting the `scheduled_at`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Allow the calling function to specify a delay when setting `scheduled_at`.
```

3. Handle conflicts with existing queued items with an `UPDATE` to the existing item's `scheduled_at` with the specific delay. **This is where the debouncing happens.**

We'll use the `@vercel/postgres` library's simple `sql` here, but your favorite library will do just fine.

```jsx

> import { crypto } from 'node:crypto'
> import { sql } from '@vercel/postgres'
> 
> async function enqueue(jobType, payload, delay = 0) {
> 	const json = JSON.stringify(payload)
> 	const debounceKey = crypto.createHash('sha256')
> 		.update(jobType + json).digest('hex')
> 	return await sql`
> 		INSERT INTO debounce_job_queue (
> 			job_type, status, payload, scheduled_at, debounce_key
> 		)
> 		VALUES (
> 			'${jobType}', 'QUEUED', '${json}',
> 			now() + INTERVAL '${delay} seconds', ${debounceKey}
> 		)
> 		-- If the item is already QUEUED, update the scheduled at w/ the delay
> 		ON CONFLICT (debounce_key, status) WHERE status = 'QUEUED'
> 		DO UPDATE SET scheduled_at = now() + INTERVAL '${delay} seconds';
> 	`
> }

Reviewer: Nit: Run the code through a formatter
```suggestion
import { crypto } from "node:crypto";
import { sql } from "@vercel/postgres";

async function enqueue(jobType, payload, delay = 0) {
  const json = JSON.stringify(payload);

  const debounceKey = crypto
    .createHash("sha256")
    .update(jobType + json)
    .digest("hex");

  return await sql`
		INSERT INTO debounce_job_queue (
			job_type, status, payload, scheduled_at, debounce_key
		)
		VALUES (
			'${jobType}', 'QUEUED', '${json}',
			now() + INTERVAL '${delay} seconds', ${debounceKey}
		)
		-- If the item is already QUEUED, update the scheduled at w/ the delay
		ON CONFLICT (debounce_key, status) WHERE status = 'QUEUED'
		DO UPDATE SET scheduled_at = now() + INTERVAL '${delay} seconds';
	`;
}
```

```

The code above may appear complex at first, but the magic happens in the `ON CONFLICT` statement. Our unique index ensures that two identical jobs cannot be `'QUEUED'` at the same time. When the query attempts to insert a job and there is an identical job that is `QUEUED`, the conflict statement is executed and the existing job's scheduled at is updated with our delay to push it back.

To query for available jobs, we'll also now use our `scheduled_at` timestamp to ensure that our function only fetches jobs that are ready to be processed. When jobs are debounced and the `scheduled_at` is pushed into the future, that prevents our query from fetching that job.

In our query, we'll also update the `status` to `PROCESSING` to mark that this job should not be picked up by any other worker and that it shouldn't be debounced again as it's being executed. In our code, we'll omit the worker polling logic and focus on the query. We'll use `SKIP LOCKED` here to prevent only query for rows that are locked due to being updated elsewhere.

> ```jsx
> async function getQueueItem(jobType) {
> 	return await sql`
> 		UPDATE debounce_job_queue
> 		SET status = 'PROCESSING'
> 		WHERE id = (
> 		  SELECT id FROM debounce_job_queue
> 		  WHERE status = 'QUEUED' and scheduled_at <= now() + INTERVAL '2 minute'
> 		  ORDER BY scheduled_at ASC
> 		  FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED
> 		  LIMIT 1
> 		)
> 		RETURNING id, payload;
> 	`
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
async function getQueueItem(jobType) {
  return await sql`
    UPDATE debounce_job_queue
    SET status = 'PROCESSING'
    WHERE id = (
      SELECT id FROM debounce_job_queue
      WHERE status = 'QUEUED' and scheduled_at <= now() + INTERVAL '2 minute'
      ORDER BY scheduled_at ASC
      FOR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED
      LIMIT 1
    )
    RETURNING id, payload;
  `;
}
```
```

> That's it! In your own worker code you'll want to also `delete` this item from the queue table when it's done processing (or similar). If you are implementing a debounce queue in Postgres, you may want to additionally consider:

Reviewer: Feels like a good differentiator for a reader to capitalize SQL keywords.
```suggestion
That's it! In your own worker code you'll want to also `DELETE` this item from the queue table when it's done processing (or similar). If you are implementing a debounce queue in Postgres, you may want to additionally consider:
```

- Adding other indexes to your table for performance.
- Adding a job expiration timestamp and clearing of expired jobs.
- Adding a column to track the number of attempts to process a given item and handling a maximum number of retries.
- Implementing a dead letter queue.
- Learning more about using `SKIP LOCKED` .

Next, we'll compare this to implementing debounce with Inngest.

## How to debounce with Inngest functions

> Inngest's architecture combines an event stream, queues and durable execution into a single reliability layer for your application. Within Inngest's internal queueing system, we have a build-in ability to debounce jobs quite easily. 

Reviewer: Attempt at making this more succinct.
```suggestion
Inngest's architecture combines an event stream, queues, and durable execution into a single reliability layer for your application. With Inngest's internal queueing system, you can easily debounce jobs.
```

The main differences to the above example is that with Inngest:

- You send events instead of messages.
- You define functions which each has their own queue(s) created automatically for you.
- Inngest calls your function for you, so you don't need to implement polling or similar in a worker.
- You can define your debounce key using any piece of data within your event's payload.

<img
  src="/assets/docs/reference/debounce.png"
  width="800"
  height={337}
  quality="95"
  alt="Visualization of how debounce is applied"
/>

> To configure debouncing for an Inngest function is a couple lines of code. In our example below, we'll create a function that generates suggested titles for a blog post every time a user saves a draft. We'll add a debounce `period` of one minute and we'll set a debounce `key` to only debounce based off the given `blog_post_id` . Setting the key will make sure that each unique blog post will be separately debounced.

Reviewer: Small grammar change.

Aside: This is a really great example!

```suggestion
Configuring debouncing for an Inngest function is a couple of lines of code. In our example below, we'll create a function that generates suggested titles for a blog post every time a user saves a draft. We'll add a debounce `period` of one minute and we'll set a debounce `key` to only debounce based off the given `blog_post_id` . Setting the key will make sure that each unique blog post will be separately debounced.
```

> ```jsx
> const generateIdeasFunction = inngest.createFunction(
>   {
> 		id: 'generate-ideas-via-open-ai',
> 		debounce: {
>       period: "1m",
> 	    key: "event.data.blog_post_id",
> 		}
> 	},
> 	{ event: 'blog/draft.saved' },
> 	async ({ event, step }) => {
> 		/* business logic omitted for sake of example */
> 	}
> )
> ```

Reviewer: Run through formatter
```suggestion
```js
const generateIdeasFunction = inngest.createFunction(
  {
    id: "generate-ideas-via-open-ai",
    debounce: {
      period: "1m",
      key: "event.data.blog_post_id",
    },
  },
  { event: "blog/draft.saved" },
  async ({ event, step }) => {
    /* call OpenAI */
  },
);
```
```
